= How To Open Compare Dialog =

This is only valid since release 2.1M4. 

In this page you will learn how to open a dialog displaying the result of a comparison. 

== Preparing the input  ==

The first thing to do is to choose an EMF Compare sub-implementation of the class of [http://help.eclipse.org/juno/index.jsp?topic=%2Forg.eclipse.platform.doc.isv%2Freference%2Fapi%2Forg%2Feclipse%2Fcompare%2FCompareEditorInput.html CompareEditorInput]. 

Two implementations are provided: 

*''ComparisonEditorInput'', that should be use when you want to display a pre-computed Comparison (the results of EMFCompare).
*''ComparisonScopeEditorInput'', that should be use when you want to open the compare editor or dialog and to let it perform the comparison.

Both are available from the '''org.eclipse.emf.compare.ide.ui''' plug-in, in the package '''org.eclipse.emf.compare.ide.ui.internal.editor'''. This is still provisional API so we may break it any time.

== Preparing the configuration  ==

When instantiating an EMF Compare specific implementation of CompareEditorInput, you have to give it at least three parameters:

*An [http://help.eclipse.org/neon/index.jsp?topic=%2Forg.eclipse.emf.compare.doc%2Fhelp%2Fdeveloper%2Fjavadoc%2Forg%2Feclipse%2Femf%2Fcompare%2Fide%2Fui%2Finternal%2Fconfiguration%2FEMFCompareConfiguration.html EMFCompareConfiguration]. This is a refined configuration of the standard CompareConfiguration so you just instantiate it like this:

<source lang="java">
EMFCompareConfiguration configuration = new EMFCompareConfiguration(new CompareConfiguration());
</source>

*An EMFCompareEditingDomain. It is not an implementation of [http://download.eclipse.org/modeling/emf/emf/javadoc/2.5.0/org/eclipse/emf/edit/domain/EditingDomain.html EditingDomain] from EMF. It shares similar concepts (it has a command stack, it can create some commands) but is much simpler. You can create it through the factory method:

<source lang="java">
// ancestor may be null
ICompareEditingDomain editingDomain = EMFCompareEditingDomain.create(left, right, ancestor); 
</source>

You can even give your own command(s) stack(s) if you need to know about executed merge commands. 

* An [http://download.eclipse.org/modeling/emf/emf/javadoc/2.5.0/org/eclipse/emf/common/notify/AdapterFactory.html AdapterFactory] used by the framework to adapt EObjects to be nicely displayed. Most of the time, a [http://download.eclipse.org/modeling/emf/emf/javadoc/2.5.0/org/eclipse/emf/edit/provider/ComposedAdapterFactory.html ComposedAdapterFactory] with the global registry is sufficient as created in the example below:

<source lang="java">
AdapterFactory adapterFactory = new ComposedAdapterFactory(ComposedAdapterFactory.Descriptor.Registry.INSTANCE);
</source>

Depending on the choosen sub-implementation of CompareEditorInput, you may need to provide additional parameters.

=== ComparisonEditorInput ===

You must provide a Comparison object, the result of the comparison computation of EMFCompare.

<source lang="java">
EMFCompare comparator = EMFCompare.builder().build();
Comparison comparison = comparator.compare(EMFCompare.createDefaultScope(left, right, ancestor));
</source>

=== ComparisonScopeEditorInput ===

You must provide the comparator (instance of EMFCompare) and the scope of the comparison.

<source lang="java">
EMFCompare comparator = EMFCompare.builder().build();
IComparisonScope scope = EMFCompare.createDefaultScope(left, right, ancestor);
</source>

== Opening the compare UI  ==

Then, you can call the black magic method from Eclipse Compare framework. You have two choices. You may either open the compare UI wihtin a modal dialog or within an editor. Just call one of the two following methods: 

* [http://help.eclipse.org/juno/index.jsp?topic=%2Forg.eclipse.platform.doc.isv%2Freference%2Fapi%2Forg%2Feclipse%2Fcompare%2FCompareUI.html&anchor=openCompareEditorOnPage(org.eclipse.compare.CompareEditorInput,%20org.eclipse.ui.IWorkbenchPage) CompareUI.openCompareEditorOnPage(CompareEditorInput, IWorkbenchPage)], to open an editor. 
*[http://help.eclipse.org/juno/topic/org.eclipse.platform.doc.isv/reference/api/org/eclipse/compare/CompareUI.html#openCompareDialog(org.eclipse.compare.CompareEditorInput) CompareUI.openCompareDialog(CompareEditorInput)], to open a modal dialog.

== End-to-end examples ==

=== With pre-computed comparison ===

<source lang="java">
public void compare(Notifier left, Notifier right, Notifier ancestor) {
    EMFCompare comparator = EMFCompare.builder().build();
    Comparison comparison = comparator.compare(EMFCompare.createDefaultScope(left, right, ancestor));

    EMFCompareConfiguration configuration = new EMFCompareConfiguration(new CompareConfiguration());
    ICompareEditingDomain editingDomain = EMFCompareEditingDomain.create(left, right, ancestor);
    AdapterFactory adapterFactory = new ComposedAdapterFactory(ComposedAdapterFactory.Descriptor.Registry.INSTANCE);
    CompareEditorInput input = new ComparisonEditorInput(configuration, comparison, editingDomain, adapterFactory);

    CompareUI.openCompareDialog(input); // or CompareUI.openCompareEditor(input);
}
</source>

=== With a comparison scope ===

<source lang="java">
public void compare(Notifier left, Notifier right, Notifier ancestor) {
    EMFCompare comparator = EMFCompare.builder().build();
    IComparisonScope scope = EMFCompare.createDefaultScope(left, right, ancestor));

    EMFCompareConfiguration configuration = new EMFCompareConfiguration(new CompareConfiguration());
    ICompareEditingDomain editingDomain = EMFCompareEditingDomain.create(left, right, ancestor);
    AdapterFactory adapterFactory = new ComposedAdapterFactory(ComposedAdapterFactory.Descriptor.Registry.INSTANCE);
    CompareEditorInput input = new ComparisonScopeEditorInput(configuration, editingDomain, adapterFactory, comparator, scope);

    CompareUI.openCompareDialog(input); // or CompareUI.openCompareEditor(input);
}
</source>

